Hello everyone in this lesson we will answer the question what is a plug in a plugin lets us add new
functionality or new features to our WordPress website or in other words when we want WordPress to be
able to do something that it can't do out of the box.
We can install a plugin to make the impossible possible.
Here's a quick metaphor.
So think of your kitchen as your WordPress website and when you first moved into your house imagine
that your kitchen did not have a dishwasher machine and so you had to wash all of your dishes by hand.
So that means in order to add the feature of automatic dishwashing to your kitchen you need to install
a dish washing machine.
So think of the dish washing machine as a plug in.
You add it into your kitchen you install it within your kitchen to add the new functionality and new
features of automatic dishwashing.
The same is true with wordpress when we want WordPress to be able to do something new that it previously
could not do.
We just install a plugin.
There are thousands of plug ins to choose from that can add all sorts of new features.
For example in this lesson why dont we use plugins to improve our photo galleries.
So if I use my main navigation to navigate to the photo gallery page and then if I click on one of these
thumbnail images so maybe if I click on the elephant image it opens the high resolution photo in a new
page and then visitors of our website have to use the back button on their web browser to switch back
to the photo gallery.
And you'll remember in our previous lesson we discussed why that's less than ideal and we reviewed how
it would be better if instead when we clicked on one of the thumbnails it opened up a larger copy right
here and the rest of the screen turned transparent black and maybe there were also arrows to switch
back and forth to the previous and next photos in the web design industry we commonly referred to a
pop up photograph like that as a light box.
Now by default WordPress does not support lightbox functionality but we can leverage the power of plug
ins to add that light box pop up functionality or feature to our Web site.
So check this out.
Lets begin by switching over to the admin dashboard of our Web site.
I can use this link in my top bar to navigate to my admin area.
Remember you can always get to your admin area by adding slash WP admin to the end of the route of your
website you are all in if you're not already logged in.
WordPress will just ask for your username and password.
OK so from our dashboard lets look in the left hand side bar about a little more than halfway down for
the item named plugins.
All right now your plug in screen might not look exactly like mine depending on which web host you're
using you may or may not have this top area that you see here.
It's entirely possible that your plug in screen only contains the part that I'm highlighting right now
and that's A-OK.
That's actually what I would prefer.
So if your plug in screen looks like mine and you do have this top area for the time being I recommend
we use the top right next icon to close out of it.
Basically what's going on is some web hosts pre-install a plug in named jet pack and this is just the
jetpacks specific menu options up here.
So for the time being I'm going to close out of that we don't need to look at it we can always bring
it up again later.
OK and now everyone's plugins screen should look very similar.
So here we see a list of all of the plugins that are currently installed.
Again different web hosts will pre-install different plugins for the time being.
None of these plugins matter.
OK we can review those at a later date.
For now let's try something fun.
Let's try to add a new plug in to our WordPress that will add the Lightbox pop up behavior to our photo
galleries.
So what we want to do is add a new plugin so you can either click the Add New button right here towards
the top or you can click add new under the plug ins menu in the sidebar.
All right now this screen lets us choose from thousands of free plugins.
Now nine times out of 10 you're probably just going to want to jump right to the top right search bar
area because you're probably looking for a specific plugin to solve a specific issue.
So in my case I will use this top right search bar and I will search for light box.
OK so we can see that that brings up all sorts of Lightbox related results.
Now sometimes the results can be overwhelming.
All of these plugins claimed to do basically the same thing right.
They all promised to create a pop up lightbox when you click on an image right in the pop up will show
you a larger higher resolution copy of the photograph.
So you might be wondering how in the world are you supposed to choose one of these plug ins when there
so many of them and they all seem so similar.
Well that's a really good question and there's not really a scientific or correct answer but I can tell
you what I usually do.
So let's take this first plug in as an example.
Notice here it tells us how many active installs it has.
So for this plug in this means that over 50000 people or I guess I should say 50000 different WordPress
Web sites are currently using this plugin.
So I would always choose a plugin that has a lot of active installs.
Odds are if a lot of other people are relying on a plugin it's probably a quality solution.
So for example this plug in you can see that it only has about 1000 active installs.
Now I'm not saying that this is a bad plugin for all I know it's the best light box plug in in the universe.
But it's up to you to sort of test out and try the different plug ins.
There's no scientific way to select a plug in here you kind of just have to do your own research.
Also word of mouth is a huge factor when it comes to plug ins.
As the weeks and months and years go by of you using WordPress you will hear your peers and other WordPress
users talk about certain plugins.
You'll hear the same plug in names get recommended again and again and again.
So as a real life example of word of mouth I can tell you that one of the top white box plug ins is
called responsive light box.
So I just search for Responsive light box and it's this one.
It's named responsive light box Spidy factory.
Now I'm not saying that any of the other light box plug ins are bad.
All I'm saying is that I've had very good experiences with this plugin in the past and we can see that
it has over 200000 active installs.
So I'm not alone in enjoying this plugin so you're free to use whatever plugin you like but for the
purposes of this course.
Why don't you search for and use the same plug in as me responsive lightbox by factory and then you
can just click this install now button.
It should just take a few seconds to install and once it completes then the button will turn into an
activate button.
So go ahead and click the blue activate.
That takes me back to my main plugin screen.
And here we can see a message that reads plug in activated.
OK so let's take it for a test drive.
So if I use this link in my top bar switch back to my public facing web site and use my navigation to
jump to my photo gallery page.
Now if I click on the elephant thumbnail here here we can see the large resolution copy of the photo
only now I have this x in the top right corner.
So if I click that it takes me right back to the photo gallery.
So if I go back into the large version I can also push the escape key on my keyboard to go back to the
gallery.
And you'll also notice these arrows down at the bottom portion of the screen so I can click on this
forward facing arrow to go to the next full resolution photo.
You get the idea.
You can also use the arrow keys on your keyboard
pretty cool.
So now users don't have to use the back button in their web browser.
Instead they're presented with a nice light box pop up experience.
And this particular plug in that we used is very flexible so we're free to customize it a bit.
So if we use this link in my bar to jump back to my admin dashboard.
And then in the sidebar look for plug ins again within this list of all of our installed plug ins we
see a responsive light box down here.
And if we click on this setting's link under responsive light box this first option here lets us customize
the particular light box styling that gets used.
So the current lightbox behavior that's getting used is called swipe box.
But if we switch it to fancy box.
So I checked that option.
And then if I scroll down to the very bottom and click save changes we see this message settings saved.
Perfect.
Let's close that message and also let's close this message that says thank you for installing responsive
light box so you can just use this X over on the right hand side to close that.
All right and now that we switched from swipe box to fancy box let's go look at our public facing web
site and see how that looks.
So jump over to the photo gallery page and click on the elephants.
And immediately we can see this is a different experience.
So now the entire screen is it blacked out just to the left and right edges are sort of a transparent
gray.
And if I hover over the image we can see this right facing arrow array here.
That lets me switch through the images if I hover over the left hand side of the image we have an arrow
to go back this direction you get the idea and we can use the x ray here to close the light box.
OK.
So it's up to you to choose which specific light box option you want to use.
But the important point here is that we just leverage the power of plug ins to create the exact photo
gallery experience that we wanted.
Now that will bring this lesson to a close.
But I do want to let you know that there are plug ins for basically anything and everything you can
think of.
Ninety nine times out of 100 if you think of a feature in your mind for your web site someone has already
created a WordPress plugin for it and odds are they've added it to that free list of plugins that we
can search from.
Now just to whet your appetite a bit I'll let you know that towards the end of this course when we work
on the Contact Us page we will leverage several new plug ins to create a highly interactive contact
page.
So don't worry this is not the last time that we will talk about plug ins in this course.
In fact even aside from the contact us lessons there are a few other moments where we will install and
leverage additional plug ins.
Now changing gears a bit in our next lesson we're going to jump back to blog posts.
We're going to address one of the simplest but most powerful aspects of Wordpress I'm referring to categories
categories will open so many new doors for us.
It's going to be a lot of fun.
Let's keep things rolling.
And I will see you in the next lesson.